Thank you.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Last week you met First Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey of Bryan, a 20-year Army veteran with a remarkable story to tell.
Not just of his service in Germany, Korea, Alaska, two tours of Vietnam, and three weeks in Southside Chicago that he will never forget.
Today he'll talk about that and his second hitch in Vietnam.
where he returned home with a second Purple Heart and a Silver Star, the third highest award given by the military.
So please welcome back to Veterans of the Valley, 1st Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey of Bryan.
Jeffrey, it's great to be back.
A remarkable story that you told us last week of your tours in Germany and Alaska and going to Vietnam for the first time.
let's move on after your first tour of vietnam you said that you came back to fort hood and uh as a chief tactical instructor uh april 4th 1968 dr martin luther king was assassinated and talk about how that caused what you did next and what your next deployment was going to chicago how did that all come about okay first of all i'm glad to be back
And coming out of Vietnam, I was assigned as a chief tactical instructor at the 3rd Corps NCO Academy.
Yes, sir.
And kind of turning that down, I chose to go back with the line unit infantry.
So I wound up back up there with a lifelong friend of mine, which is deceased now, 1st Sergeant Swarford and others.
And they had just activated this unit.
made up primarily of people who could not, would not, didn't want to go to Vietnam, one of them light infantry units.
So we had the worst of the worst.
And the mission, as soon as we began to get personnel in, the primary mission, in addition to being combat ready, became riot control training.
And my battalion was the primary riot control
organization on post and other supporting units and we trained up and got ready to go whenever called out our primary target was new orleans followed by houston and so far as i could tell those two cities missed the revolution right there was never any call for troops in either one of those cities
But after the death of Martin Luther King, we got alerted on the second day or so there after he was assassinated.
And we did get the call, but we didn't go to New Orleans.
In fact, we didn't know where the target was.
We knew where it should be.
You know, it's a guessing game.
We're going to New Orleans or Houston.
Nothing going on either direction.
But we wound up going to Chicago.
This was announced after we got down to Burstrom Air Force Base.
And...
We went and we did the job that we were sent to do.
You flew, and I think you said you flew in a 747.
747.
Right.
In a passenger jet.
That's right.
The Army either commanded it or leashed or had on standby X number 747 schedule.
Moved troops around the country.
Right.
And we flew first class on a 747.
If you consider combat loaded, every man has got his basic load of ammunition included.
It wasn't a pleasure cruise.
You were combat ready.
You had your basic load of ammunition, bayonets, steel pots, flak jackets.
You went for
It was a combat situation so far as we were concerned.
You've been to Vietnam.
That's right.
You faced an enemy there.
But this, when you're on that airplane, I guess you're a little bit anticipating what kind of resistance you're going to be facing in this sort of a situation on an American street in Chicago.
Well, I don't know if you have time to do that.
It never occurred to me to think of it in those terms because, number one,
You know what your mission is.
It's to control people with a minimum amount of force and casualties and stuff like that.
But you are armed to the teeth.
You've got your M60 machine guns, your .50 calibers.
You've got everything you need to do this job.
And if you're mission-oriented and you have sworn allegiance to those above you, starting with the President of the United States, you're going to carry out the mission.
Right.
You don't get a lot of time to pick and choose your battles or think about whether or not you agree with the decision.
Once the decision is made, the mission becomes mine to execute.
And that's all I need to do.
Talk about the mission.
What did you find when you got to Southside Chicago?
Well, okay, fine.
But just prior to departing Fort Hood,
getting up at 4 o'clock in the morning, mustering and drawing your weapon out of the armed room, getting your basic load of ammunition on palletized, ready to go.
I had one man that came to me and said, first sergeant, I don't want to go to Chicago.
And
I looked at him because I knew exactly where he's coming from.
I just said, now, is it that you don't want to go or you're telling me you don't want to go or you're not going?
He said, oh, no, no, no, no.
I'm saying I don't want to go.
If you tell me to go, I'm going, I'm going to do the job I'm assigned.
I said, fine.
Go over there and report to First Sergeant Swofford.
That's my friend who had the red detachment, going to stay at Fort Hood.
We got down to Chicago.
And we flew out of Burstam Air Force Base in Austin on the 747s we were talking about.
As we came into Chicago, came into O'Haraville, I remember the city, a parlor smoke hanging over the city at about 3,000 feet.
Looks like the whole city is burning down.
We did plane, and within an hour, we were in Grant Park out on the shores of Lake Michigan.
There was no riots out there.
Absolutely none.
We set up bivouac in the park that night and moved out at 9 o'clock the next morning, downtown Chicago, Southside, and that's where the riots were going on.
And that's where our action took place.
We got organized together.
Within 30 minutes after we got there, within an hour after we moved into, because we moved from Grant Park, 9 o'clock the next morning by bus, with escorts you wouldn't believe, like every police officer with a car, MPs with Jeeps, and I don't know who they belonged to, but they were there.
Sheriff's people, FBI, just about everybody you could see escorted us downtown to Jackson Park, which was also my first experience with organized gangs, per se.
We talk about the Crips and the Blood, something that several years ago was a problem.
They should be introduced to the Blackstone Rangers, the granddaddy of some of the gangs.
Right.
We de-planed, de-bust in Jackson Park, formed up in formation, and that's the first conflict right there because hecklers come along.
And they start harassing the troops, girls in miniskirts and guys, you know.
But once you call out one squad, fix bayonets,
They'd break that one up in a hurry, and that was all over.
That got their attention.
Right.
By 4 o'clock that afternoon, we were on the streets, though.
And we had it there.
We locked it down.
We was on the streets for 32 hours at 100%.
We learned a lot of things.
Number one, you can stand.
I had a .50 caliber mounted on the top of the building, and you can stand on the top of the building
And you can see three quarters of a mile in any direction up and down the street.
You can always tell where the fight or the riot is fixed to break out because it's like watching a stream of water.
There go two individuals, a third one joining, four, five, six.
And pretty soon it looks like a moving, flowing stream.
And all you got to do is cut off that stream and
you disrupt the riot.
If you give it time, if it's at night and you can't see them that well, you listen for the breaking glass.
When you hear the glass breaking, you know where all the liquor stores are because that's the first thing you break into.
Get the liquor, then we'll get the dry goods or burn the place down just for the hell of it.
But it was a unique experience.
What were your
What were your personal thoughts during this time?
Dr. King had been assassinated two days before.
What were your personal thoughts as a black soldier who embraced Dr. King's belief of peace?
What were your own thoughts in the mission that you were asked to perform?
Okay.
You don't, with me, you have a lot of time prior to this.
By now, I've probably been in the Army 15 years.
Yes, sir.
So I've been in this game for a while.
I've had time to evaluate all of the situations, the relationship between races and so forth.
So I'm pretty well set at where I'm at.
And you gotta realize that growing up in Brazos County, Texas, it wasn't my idea of a Upatone race thing.
And one of the reasons why I stayed in the Army was because I was drafted, first of all, we've neglected that.
I didn't volunteer, I was drafted.
But after being in the Army a year, I realized that the playing field wasn't level, but it was certainly so much more level than it was here, and I stayed in.
because I not only could render service to my country, but I could also advance within the limits of my own ability to a certain extent.
So going into there, we had already been through the dogs in Alabama with Lester Maddox and his pickaxes and Bull Connors with his dogs and stuff.
So you already know what's right and wrong.
But you have also been through the rhetoric of the Black Panthers and other
violent perpetuating groups and that wasn't the answer so when you get into a riot situation you accomplish nothing but destruction you need to talk and i am duty-bound to enforce whatever orders are issued so that's where i stood that's why i could let that boy leave that guy back at uh fort hood
And on the second morning when we were in Grand Park, the colonel came over.
He said, first sergeant, how many people you bring with you?
I told him.
He says, you're missing one, aren't you?
I said, yes.
He said, where is it?
I said, I left him back.
He said, why?
I told him.
You know what he said?
He said, that's fine.
You did the right thing.
But that was the way the unit was trained, and we were probably 40% black.
And they got more anxious to do their job when they found out the rioters were really burning down and killing their own people.
They were not.
They might have gotten more support if they had been out in Grant Park burning down that area of town, but they weren't.
I want to go to a few photos right now that will sort of go along with the story that we've told.
One photo here, this first one, if we look at it.
We saw this photo last week.
People didn't see the show last week.
That was you after your first tour of Vietnam.
And I guess just prior to this deployment to Chicago.
This was about 1967 or so, I believe you told me.
That would be right.
Right, okay.
This is a photo from an obviously an aerial photo of this sort of is in line of sort of how you described what things looked like when you flew into Chicago with the with the smoke rising from the streets.
If we could I'd like to stop the photos right now and we're going to visit a little bit about Vietnam and then we'll come back with a couple of more photos here in just a second.
Before we leave the Chicago service, I wanted to read what one of the person wrote who was actually a witness to the days following the assassination.
He said, by Saturday, April the 6th, this would have been two days after the assassination, 6,000 National Guard troops had arrived in Chicago to suppress the riots and to protect firefighters in the field.
The following day, 5,000 U.S.
Army troops arrived to further curtail the rioters.
And by Monday, the riots had dissipated and the fires were extinguished.
So all together, you all pretty much stopped the riots over the weekend.
In the end, only one firefighter was wounded by gunfire.
12 civilians were killed, 170 buildings were destroyed, resulting in millions of dollars of damage.
So the idea to protect lives for the most part, although tragically 12 civilians were killed, you all did your job.
We try to.
Exactly.
There's one thing I'd like to point out about the picture.
I had been in Chicago.
My father-in-law lived in Chicago, Southside Chicago.
So I'd been in Chicago a couple of times prior to the riots.
Didn't know the city or anything.
But when you are sightseeing or traveling as a visitor, you can only see whatever is in your field of vision.
Mm-hmm.
Consequently, you can't see the next street over.
And when we came in with the riots, you can't see the buildings that's burning on the next block.
You can see those that's right here.
Now, when I go back into Chicago years later, like I was up there three or four years ago, we've been back two or three times since then, you have a different perspective of it.
Because now,
You can see the vacant spots that used to be these mass solid one block tenants housing.
You can see through the vacant space to the next three street.
You know what the reason is, you know the cause, but you couldn't see that before and you couldn't see it during, but you can see it now.
The topography of the area has changed because these lots are still vacant.
They haven't rebuilt.
Wow.
I had a boy that was walking the guard up and down his mother's house, in front of his mother's house.
I had one that the Blackstone Ranger told him he could not come back to Chicago ever because they were going to... Didn't worry anybody, didn't.
I did take the boy off the streets, put him on that 50 on the roof to protect him, but...
We did what we needed to do.
And he was protecting Mama's house.
That's right.
Bless his heart.
Second tour of Vietnam, Company E, 1st Battalion, 12th Cav.
Talk about your second tour, how it was different a little bit from the first tour.
I know you talked to me about a difference in...
and how you engaged the enemy, how the enemy engaged you, learning to travel, sort of learn from the enemy as far as traveling in small groups.
Talk about sort of the nature of your second tour of Vietnam.
Well, the second tour was different primarily in approach.
With the Vietnamese, it was a kind of let's live and let's live.
We don't really hunt down the enemy.
If they attack you, then you defend yourself.
But we were not out there with the 10th Army Division.
It was not a let's go out and find them and destroy.
But when you came to the camp, you had to get reoriented.
Because now your job here now is to search and destroy.
It is to find, fix, and annihilate or neutralize.
You are in an attack mode with the American army.
In Baghdad or in Afghanistan, those guys are not just out there kind of keeping the peace.
They're looking for action.
That is the nature of the beast.
And with the cab, you're going to get it.
because that's their mission.
I found it to be vastly different about what I had been trained to expect my entire military career.
You got more than you needed.
It's like always, in order to accomplish the mission,
You sometimes have to go outside of the box.
As a result, we devised and had certain little units that did special things.
I had a hunter-killer team as an example that was not a part of the table of organization and equipment, the TONE.
We just organized it.
We had snipers.
I had a section of snipers.
That wasn't organized according to TONE.
but the commanders found them to be useful because you can take a sniper and put him with every company or platoon.
He did special operations, special mission.
By this time though, the entire mission in Vietnam had changed.
We were into a holding pattern or a small unit...
type field operation.
We changed commanders, West Molan was gone and it was a small unit type operation.
We also, there was another incident in that second tour that I failed to mention.
One of the first units out of our battalion,
during the Cambodian invasion was guess who?
That hunter killer team of mine and me.
We had, we was taking in a 105 artillery piece, gonna sit it on the ground with the crew on one helicopter.
A bulldozer slung under the second helicopter with the tracks and blade off on a third helicopter.
and we go in a small force, being eight of us at this time, not counting the artillery crew and the engineer squad, the security area, and right behind us, practically at the same time landing, is supposed to be an infantry company.
Well, guess what?
The artillery crew and the engineer crew, which was on the second craft of the engineers,
They didn't land because the first, that Black Hawk of ours landed, my crew was off.
The artillery is slung beneath the belly of a C-133, not a C-133, a helicopter, transport cargo helicopter.
And the ammunition is slung below that, the gun and then the ammunition.
They cut the ammunition loose.
Now they should move up 50 feet, drop the gun.
They don't.
The crew chief cut that gun loose right there.
It landed on top of the ammunition, flipped over.
Now the artillery crew refused to get off the aircraft because they can't lift it back by themselves.
Engineers can't land in there because there's space just for about one cargo helicopter per.
Short story is
We wound up there on the ground, me and my people, that night with orders to secure that helicopter and ammunition.
And we're in Cambodia, which was... It depends on your outlook.
It's been compared to be shooting fish in a bow.
The enemy weren't expecting you.
They didn't know you were coming.
They didn't even recognize you.
So I...
We were going down a trail, came around Little Lake, looks over there, and there's a guy leaning up beside a bunker just watching us, just at home.
He doesn't recognize us as the enemy.
He didn't know.
So if you were kind of laying to mix it up, that was the place to be.
We've got about five minutes left.
22 November 1969, serving in Tainan Province.
Talk about the action that led to your being awarded the Silver Star.
Once again, we was out with that hunter-killer team, and this time we got a captain from the S-2 out.
We received information that the boundary between the 1st Cal Division and the 25th Infantry Division
were being utilized as a transportation communications alley for the NVA.
And this was established because neither unit could shoot to within 200 meters of this boundary line without getting permission from the other.
So if the enemy sits out there one night and watches, he knows that you're shooting up to here from that direction, up to here from that direction, but you're not shooting here.
So he just safely walks down the highway or down the trail.
So we took that crew out there to ambush this thing and we did.
We killed two people and attempted an extraction by the battalion commander with his aircraft.
And that went nowhere except with 13 bullet holes in it.
And then we must run and fought for the next four hours and got three other aircraft shot up.
I don't know how many people wounded.
Short story was they could not extract us.
And we lost one KIA in that and two people wounded and wound up with only three or four people.
And being extracted, eventually, one of those outside the box deals we talked about, about a captain from the 25th Infantry Division.
He had an armored outfit.
And he had told me early in the day when he inserted us while on a resupply run into our location,
And if I got in trouble to call him, I did, and he responded.
He got us out of that.
So I have a strong affection for that man today.
I'll bet you do.
I want to read the citation where you were awarded the Silver Star.
It says 22 November 1969.
while serving in the Tianan Province Republic of Vietnam.
When a force led by 1st Sergeant Bailey left their position, they encountered intense automatic weapons fire.
1st Sergeant Bailey repeatedly exposed himself to the hostile fire to pull the wounded to safety.
His gallant action is in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service and reflects great credit upon himself, his unit, and the United States Army.
The Silver Star, obviously, it's an award that you own proudly.
Yes, that would be true.
Yes.
I don't need any more.
Right.
Your awards and commendations are many among them.
From 62 to 65, Army Commendation Medal.
May of 67, Awarded Army Commendation Medal with Valor Device.
March of 1967, your first Purple Heart.
June of 67, Army Commendation Medal, first Oakleaf Cluster.
July of 67, Bronze Star Medal.
April of 70, Silver Star.
November 69, second Purple Heart.
April 70, Army Air Medal.
June of 1970, Bronze Star Medal, first Oakleaf Cluster.
And January of 1973, upon your retirement, the Army
commendation medal, and that was just a few.
And a matter of fact, we have a photograph right there of your medal box.
You can see the Purple Heart, and to the right of it, the Silver Star.
And there's the certificate, the Silver Star certificate.
Very proud as well you should be.
We're out of time.
There's so much more to tell, but we're out of time.
But thank you for your service.
And thank you for being here.
Thank you for having me.
All right.
Thank you.
Jeffrey Bailey retired from the Army 31 January 1973, the same year that he started Bailey Trucking, which he and his family still operate today.
He and Ora have been married some 53 years and have four children and five grandchildren.
We salute Jeffrey Bailey for his two decades of brave military service.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
you